<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></h2>
			<p>Morning broke in all its splendor over the little village she had left behind.</p>
			<p>Dewy flowers, touched by the rising day, glittered in their beds of green, while mists, etherial as air, hung over the verdant meadows. Long lines of hills whose tops rested against the blue sky, mirrored their heads in the waters which flowed at their feet.</p>
			<p>Beauty was on every hand. In whatever direction the eye turned, it beheld the smile of God, and all nature seemed a psalm of thanksgiving.</p>
			<p>Caleb Thorne arose, and shaking off dull sleep, called Margaret to her morning duties, while his wife bustled about the house in her usual manner.</p>
			<p>Neither looked on the lovely scene before them. If their eyes chanced to turn in its direction, their souls took no cognizance of all the wealth of beauty which was before them.</p>
			<p>“What on earth keeps that gal up stairs so long,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thorne, “I’ll call her and bring her down I guess⁠—Mar-ga-ret-Mar-ga-ret Thorne; it’s most six o’clock-get up.”</p>
			<p>No sound; no footstep. She waited a full half hour, then Caleb returned from the barn, having milked the cows, a labor which he had performed since Margaret’s illness.</p>
			<p>“That gal ain’t up yet,” said his wife, as he came and placed the pails on the table.</p>
			<p>His breath came fast, for he feared she might be ill, or dead, perhaps.</p>
			<p>“Go and see what the matter is,” he said to his wife. But as she was somewhat afraid to enter a room where all was so silent, she hesitated. At length she mounted the stairs very slowly, calling Margaret’s name at each step. When she had reached the landing, she found the door wide open, but no Margaret was there, and the bed was undisturbed. Pale and trembling, she went down stairs.</p>
			<p>“She’s-she’s gone!” were the words with which she met her husband’s inquiring gaze. “Yes, gone; run away, I s’pose, in the night.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thorne sank into the nearest seat, almost paralyzed with emotion and apprehension.</p>
			<p>“Gone?” he repeated; it was a long time before he could take in her meaning. It came at last; not as some truths do with a flash, but it dropped like lead into his soul, down-down-to depths he knew not of. And she had gone, just when he was waking to realize a fraction of her worth; just as he was learning to look with a single spark of love on her young, fair face, growing every day so much like her dear, dead mother’s.</p>
			<p>He leaned his face upon his hands and wept. The fount of feeling long dried was touched, and his heart felt a tenderness it had never known before, for his child.</p>
			<p>Through the dark atmosphere about his soul a ray of light broke in. Down through long years it crept, and seemed to carry him back to the time when his Mary was a bride.</p>
			<p>There comes a moment to every soul, when its treasures are truly appreciated; when hearts God has given to love and bless us are rightly valued. Well is it for us if that moment comes while they are with us in the earthly form.</p>
			<p>It seemed but yesterday when she was a bride, white in soul, as well as attire. How vividly the scene now stood before him, and he felt, as he then did, the beating of her young, trusting heart, which she gave into his keeping.</p>
			<p>Down through all these years flowed the light of recollection, and brought to mind the morning when a tiny babe was placed beside its mother for him to love and cherish. Grief shook his soul to its foundations. Through his rough nature crept a tenderness he had not known for years, for those two treasures-one beneath the sod; the other⁠—where?</p>
			<p>“I s’pose you didn’t look to see if the door was onbolted, did you?” remarked his wife, wondering what made him so long silent.</p>
			<p>“Come to think ‘ont, ‘t was,” he answered, like one awaking from a dream.</p>
			<p>“Then, the ungrateful thing’s gone; and I am glad, if she couldn’t be more thankful to us for her home.”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—Margaret’s gone.” His voice sounded far off, as though his soul was off in search of her.</p>
			<p>“Margaret Thorne has run away!” went from mouth to mouth, and harsh comments, bitter words, flashed through the village a few days, and then all was still again.</p>
			<p>Wild and fearful emotions rushed through the mind of Margaret, when, after a long, weary walk, she reached the town of N⁠—, with old Trot at her side.</p>
			<p>It was a small white house, apart from others, and far from the road, at which she applied for board, drawn thither by its quiet, homelike appearance, and a strange feeling within her mind which she had not fully learned to trust.</p>
			<p>She felt that her weary feet could go no farther, as she walked up the path, bordered by flowers, and knocked timidly at the door.</p>
			<p>It was opened by a woman of about forty years, whose pleasant face smiled upon her, as she invited her to enter.</p>
			<p>Margaret took courage from the kind manner in which she was met, and at once made known her desire to obtain a boarding place, designing to work in the factory near at hand.</p>
			<p>“I have no room at present for anyone,” she answered, “but if you are to work in the factory there are boarding houses built by the corporation, at which you can obtain accommodations. The first step, however, will be to call upon the overseer, and if you like I will go with you after you have rested.”</p>
			<p>Margaret was too grateful to reply in a satisfactory manner, but her face looked what her tongue could not speak.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong glanced at the young girl, and thought how unfitted she seemed for such a place of labor. With her large experience, for many had wandered there before, burdened with heavy struggles, she quickly saw that grief, or want, perhaps both, had driven her from home, or shelter, whichever it might be.</p>
			<p>She shrank as she thought of the rough influences to which she would be subjected, and though she knew she could not avert the fate of this wanderer, or any of those who came to her for love and sympathy, yet she inwardly resolved to befriend her, and do all that she could to aid one so young and innocent, through a cold world.</p>
			<p>“I’ll get you a cup of tea, and something to eat,” she said, and hurried out of the room before Margaret could reply.</p>
			<p>This was not the first one to whom her bounty had been given; not the first lonely stranger who had supped at her table.</p>
			<p>Old Trot sat on the doorstep during this time, his eyes riveted on the house, and his ears poised to catch every sound within.</p>
			<p>When all was ready, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong called Margaret to partake of a good substantial meal, which her busy hands had so speedily prepared, and knowing that the young girl might feel diffident, seated her alone at the table, while she busied herself about the room.</p>
			<p>How Margaret longed to share her meal with Trot. What was her surprise to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong gather some scraps of meat and bones, and carry them to the hungry animal.</p>
			<p>No wonder the girl thought her an angel; she rose from the table, her eyes too dim to see her newly-found friend, and her heart too full to thank her for all her kindness.</p>
			<p>In a short time <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong was in readiness to accompany her to the factory, and the two left the house, the former making the walk pleasant by her familiar conversation and the sympathy she manifested for the wanderer. Trot followed them, and, as if conscious that his young mistress had found a friend, occasionally ran on before, looking up in their faces, and leaping as if wild with joy.</p>
			<p>After a short walk through the most retired part of the village, they reached the factory building and entered.</p>
			<p>The noise was so great that Margaret thought she should be stunned, and put her hands upon her ears, to keep out the sound. She had never been in a factory before, and the thought of having to bear all that confusion, every day, sent a feeling to her heart somewhat akin to terror; but she must labor, and where else could she go?</p>
			<p>The curious gaze of the girls, as they entered the weaving room, was most trying to her sensitive nature, and Margaret’s face crimsoned, as she followed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong to the farthest part of the room, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Field, the overseer, was conversing with one of the operators.</p>
			<p>He was a black-eyed, sharp-featured person, and there was something in his look which caused her to shudder, as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong made known her errand.</p>
			<p>“Have you ever worked in a factory?” he asked, in a quick, impatient manner.</p>
			<p>“No sir.”</p>
			<p>“A new hand, then,” he said, with a little more suavity.</p>
			<p>“We need another hand in the carding-room, so you may go there. I will show you the room.”</p>
			<p>He led the way, Margaret following, yet keeping close to her new friend.</p>
			<p>The noise of the room was almost as great as that of the other, but it was sunnier, and the windows were adorned with some beautiful plants. The girls seemed more modest and less inclined to stare at visitors. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Field was about to leave, when he suddenly turned to Margaret and inquired when she intended to commence.</p>
			<p>“Tomorrow, sir, if you are ready for me?”</p>
			<p>“All right. Be on hand at the ringing of the bell.”</p>
			<p>“I had almost forgotten an important part of my errand,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong, “and that is, a boarding place for this young lady.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, she wishes to board in the Corporation. Well, there is a place at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crawford’s. I think she has a spare room. Her house is on Elm Street, third block.”</p>
			<p>It was a relief to feel the fresh air again, and to be away from the noise and confusion of the factory. As soon as they had reached the street, Margaret inquired of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong, the way to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crawford’s.</p>
			<p>“O! I shall go with you,” said that kind lady, to the great relief of the young and timid girl, already worn and weary with fatigue and excitement.</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” in low, but sweet tones, came from her lips, and the two wended their way along, with Trot close behind.</p>
			<p>They passed pleasant private dwellings, and then turned into a long and narrow street, with blocks of houses on either side. Margaret had supposed by the name, that the street must be very pretty, with rows of trees on each side. She was just learning that there are many misnomers in life, and that this was one.</p>
			<p>The house in the third block was reached, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong rapped with her parasol on the door. A red faced, but good-natured appearing woman answered the call.</p>
			<p>“We have called to see if you have a spare room for a young lady who wishes board,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong.</p>
			<p>“We ‘ve got a spare bed for a factory girl, if that’s what you want,” she replied, grinning, and eyeing Margaret from head to foot.</p>
			<p>“But have you no room she can have by herself?”</p>
			<p>“Bless your stars, no my lady. We don’t take them kind o’ boarders. There’s plenty of places where genteel folks are taken, if they like to be starved out and out,” and her face glowed with such genuine good nature, that her questioner felt that whatever else one might have to endure, they would at least have a sunny face to cheer them.</p>
			<p>“This young woman can sleep with other folks, can’t she?” inquired the good-natured woman, and her smile, not of sarcasm, but true goodness, though rough, saved Margaret’s tears.</p>
			<p>“If you have no other, she must,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong, disappointedly, for she saw from the first, a native dignity and delicacy in Margaret which would shrink from the contact with others, and intended to have paid the extra price demanded for a room herself, if one could have been obtained.</p>
			<p>At that moment, old Trot came in through the open door, and looked around, as though he did not like the appearance of things.</p>
			<p>“That dog can’t come,” said the woman, losing for the first time her pleasant smile. “Maybe he’s your’s though, madam?” she said apologetically.</p>
			<p>“No, he’s mine, and I must have him with me,” broke in Margaret, “and I cannot-”</p>
			<p>She stopped short, frightened at her own earnest words and manner.</p>
			<p>“I think he will be better off with me,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong; “I will keep him for you.”</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t care myself about the cur,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crawford, following them to the door, “but my boarders are so agin anything in the shape of a dog.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly; she could scarcely expect you to take him; and besides, I want him to watch my chickens and garden. I took a fancy to him the moment I first saw him.”</p>
			<p>Having thus made all satisfactory in regard to the dog, as far as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crawford was concerned, they bade her good day, and reached home just before dark.</p>
			<p>“You are too kind,” said Margaret to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Armstrong, who told her that she must remain all night with her, and then she could say no more, but broke down completely.</p>
			<p>The kind woman took her at once to a neat little bedroom, and permitted Trot to lie on a mat close to the door of his mistress.</p>
			<p>Weary and worn, she gladly went to bed. Sleep came at last, and the tired, intense state of her mind was lost in slumber. She dreamt that she was at her home again, and that she was going to marry Clarence. They were walking to the village church together, over the soft green meadows. The air was balmy and full of sweetness; the sunshine lay in golden bars at her feet, and her whole soul glowed with happiness, life, and love. The bells⁠—her marriage bells⁠—pealed out joyously on the air, while she turned to Clarence, saying, “I had a terrible dream; I thought you had deserted me.” Another peal⁠—merry and full-then the meadows that were so warm and sunny, grew cold and wet; and a cloud came between her and the golden sun. The bell rolled forth another peal-it sounded like a knell-and she awoke.</p>
			<p>The factory bell was ringing, calling the operatives to labor.</p>
			<p>A sweet voice broke on her utter desolation just at that moment, saying:</p>
			<p>“That is the first bell; you will have just time enough to dress and take your breakfast.”</p>
			<p>Mechanically she arose, dressed, and forcing back her hot tears, went below, to sit again at the table of one who ever remembered these words: “As ye have opportunity.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
