<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span></h2>
			<p>Summer’s soft foliage changed to gold and red, and the distant hilltops rested their brown summits against blue and sapphire skies. A soft mist lay over the scene, almost entrancing, to the soul, while the senses seemed wrapped in that dream-cloud which borders the waking and sleeping worlds.</p>
			<p>Seven times had the cyprus turned to a golden flame, beside the grave of fair Alice.</p>
			<p>Seven times had the pines nodded over the snow-white bed, under which lay her sacred dust.</p>
			<p>Seven years had gone by with their lights and shadows, since he laid her form beneath the green sod-and wept as only those have wept, whose light has gone out from their dwelling.</p>
			<p>Rich and full had these years been in their strange experiences, while firm as a rock had grown his faith in the unseen whose love and guardianship is round us as the atmosphere is about the earth. It was a fact to him and not sentiment alone, that, though his Alice had passed on to a higher existence, her life was more clearly than ever blended with his own. Like warp and woof, their souls seemed woven, and he would sooner have doubted his material existence, than question her daily presence.</p>
			<p>The days grew richer in glory, till one by one, the dry leaves withered and fell to the ground, as even our brightest hopes must sometimes fade and fall. The sky was darker and more lowery. The air lost its balmy softness, and was harsh and chilly, till no sign of foliage was seen⁠—nought but the leafless branches stretching their bare arms towards the sky. The meadows were brown and cheerless. The silvery brooks trilled out no merry song. Life grew hushed and still without, while more joyous became the tones of happy hearts within pleasant homes. Fires blazed on the hearthstones, and charity went abroad, to administer to those whom Christ has said, “Ye have always with you.” Cities were gay with life, and people went to and fro from homes of plenty, with quick, earnest steps, as though life was a continuous chain of golden links.</p>
			<p>The thoughtful walked amid all these lively scenes, and wondered if the gay plumage covered only happy breasts.</p>
			<p>The gay passed on, and thought only of joy and their own pleasures, dreaming not that saddened lives had an existence near at hand.</p>
			<p>Afar from all this life and gaiety, stood a low, brown cottage in a barren spot, upon the brow of a hill. No trees sheltered it, giving that air of protection which ever sends delight to the beholder. No indication of taste or culture met the sight; naught but a bare existence, and everyday toil to sustain it, impressed the passerby.</p>
			<p>One day when the wind blew loud and bleak, and the snow fell fast, a young girl looked from that cottage window, upon the scene before her, with that abstraction which one feels when all hope has withered, and every fresh impulse of a young heart has been chilled.</p>
			<p>She scarcely realized that the afternoon was fast wearing away, until the entrance of one, who, in a sharp, shrill voice, thus addressed her: “Well, Margaret Thorne, I hope you have looked out of that ere winder long ‘nough for one day. I’ve been inter this room fifty times at least, and you havn’t stirred an inch. Now go and get supper, milk the cows, and feed the pigs; and mind, don’t forget to fodder that young heifer in the new stall-and look here, you lazy thing, this stocking won’t grow any unless it’s in your hands, so when supper’s over, mind you go to work on ‘t.”</p>
			<p>Margaret went quickly to her duties, glad to escape from the sound of that voice, and be alone with her own thoughts.</p>
			<p>This was but a portion of her daily life of drudgery. The old house was no home to her, now that her dear mother was laid in the little churchyard. She could just remember her. It was years before, when, a little child, she used to hear a sweet voice singing her to sleep every night. The remembrance of that, and of the bright smile which greeted her each morning, was all that made her life endurable. She had no present-no future. It was this bright recollection on which she was pensively meditating that stormy afternoon.</p>
			<p>Margaret’s mother, Mary Lee, had married when very young, a man greatly her inferior. She was one of those gentle, timid beings, who can not endure, and brave their way through a cold world, much less a daily contact with a nature so crude and repulsive as that of her husband’s. She longed to live for her child’s sake, but the rough waves of life beat rudely against her bark-it parted its hold, the cold sea swept over it, and earth, so far as human sight went, knew her no more.</p>
			<p>One balmy spring day, when the blue skies seemed wedded to the emerald hills, they laid her form away, and little Margaret had lost a mother’s earthly protection.</p>
			<p>In less than a year after that sweet face went out of the home, another came to take her place; a woman in form and feature, but in nature a tyrant, harsh and cruel.</p>
			<p>For little Margaret she had no love, nought but bitter words; while her father, growing more silent and morose each day, and finding his home a scene of contest, absented himself, and passed most of his leisure hours with more congenial companions in the village.</p>
			<p>Margaret grew to womanhood with but a limited education; indeed, a very meagre one, such only as she could obtain from an irregular attendance at the village school, in summer when the farm work was lightest, and in winter, a day now and then when the bleak weather and the rough, almost impassable roads allowed her to reach the place which was to her far more pleasant than any other on earth.</p>
			<p>It was her hands which done the heaviest and hardest work of the family. No word of cheer or praise ever passed her mother’s lips. All this, and it was no wonder her life was crushed out, that her step had no lightness, and her eye none of the vivacity of youth. The outdoor work, such as caring for the cattle, was, at last added to her other burdens; yet all this she would have done willingly, could her soul have received something which she felt she so much needed-the light and blessing of love. She was deeply impressed with this when she entered other homes on errands, and she longed for the warmth of affection she saw manifested in every look and word of their happy inmates. Yet her poor, crushed nature dared not rise and assert its rights. She had been oppressed so long, that the mind had lost all native elasticity, and one whose sympathies were alive would have looked on her as a blighted bud-a poor uncared for flower, by life’s roadside.</p>
			<p>It was quite dark when she finished her milking, and went to give the young heifer her hay. She loved this animal more than any living thing beside the old house dog, and as she patted her soft hide, the creature turned on her eyes which seemed full of love, as if to show to her that there is some light in the darkest hour, something compensatory in the lowliest form of labor. Margaret lingered beside the animal, and thought how much better she loved her than she did her present mother. “I love you, Bessie,” she said, as the creature stretched forth her head to scent the warm milk in the pail. “I ‘ve a good mind to, Bessie; you want some, don’t you?” and without stopping to think of the consequences, she turned some of the contents of the pail into Bessie’s trough.</p>
			<p>“Margaret Thorne! I wonder if you don’t know when it’s dark. It’s high time your work was done!” screamed her mother at the top of her voice. She seized her pails and ran to the house, making all possible haste to strain and set the milk away. But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thorne took it from her hands, saying, “Go and ‘tend to the supper. I’ll do this myself.”</p>
			<p>“There ain’t as much as there ought to be inter two quarts,” said her mother, returning and looking the girl squarely in the eye. “What does this mean? I’d like to know.”</p>
			<p>Margaret was awestruck. She dared not tell her that she had given some to Bessie, and yet she could not tell an untruth. One struggle, and she answered: “I gave some to Bessie,” letting fall a dish in her fright. It broke into atoms.</p>
			<p>“Careless jade you! Break my dishes and steal my milk; giving it without my leave to a dumb beast. There, take that,” and she gave her a sharp blow on the face.</p>
			<p>It was not the blow that made the poor girl’s blood tinge her cheeks, but the sense of degradation; the low life she was living, in daily contact with one so overbearing, coarse, and rude.</p>
			<p>She did not weep, but one might have known by those suppressed sobs, that the heart’s love was being sapped, all its feelings outraged.</p>
			<p>At that moment her father came in, and finding supper delayed, commenced scolding in a loud voice.</p>
			<p>“I tell ye what, woman, I won’t work and provide, to be treated in this ere way. D’ ye hear?” and he came close to Margaret and looked into her face.</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir. I was late tonight.”</p>
			<p>“Yer allus late, somehow. Why don’t yer stir round and be lively like other gals, and be more cheery like?”</p>
			<p>His poor, rough nature was beginning to feel the need of a better life.</p>
			<p>“Let her work as I have, and she’ll be thankful to have a roof over her head, let alone the things I make her,” broke in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thorne. “When I was a gal, I had to work for my bread and butter.” Having thus relieved her mind, she flew busily about, and the supper was soon ready, to which they sat down, but not as to a homelike repast. Such a thing was not known in that house.</p>
			<p>The evening, as usual, passed in a dull routine of drudgery, and Margaret was, as she had been hundreds of times before, glad to reach its close and retire to her room.</p>
			<p>Thus wore the winter slowly away, and the days so full of labor, unrelieved by pleasure of any kind, were fast undermining the health and spirits of the sad girl.</p>
			<p>When spring came, her step was slower and her cheek paler, but there was no eye of love to mark those changes, and her labors were not lessened. At length her strength gave way, and a slow fever coursed through her veins as the result of over-taxation. The languor it produced was almost insupportable, and she longed for the green woods, and the pure air, and a sight of running waters.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thorne saw that something must be done, and finally consented that Margaret might take a little recreation in the manner she had proposed, accompanying her consent with the remark that she thought it a very idle way of spending one’s time.</p>
			<p>Margaret’s constant companion in her rambles was the faithful dog Trot, who highly enjoyed this new phase of life, and with him at her side she had nothing to fear.</p>
			<p>The change brought new life to her wasted system, and as she conned over the beauties around, watched the sparkle of the running brooks, and listened to the songs of the free birds, she wished that her life was as free and beautiful.</p>
			<p>One day while trimming a wreath of oak leaves, she thought she heard footsteps, and the low growl of Trot, before she had time to turn her head, confirmed her impression that someone was approaching.</p>
			<p>She turned, and encountered the gaze of a stranger, who said in a deep, pleasant voice:</p>
			<p>“I have lost my way, I believe. Is this Wilton Grove, Miss?”</p>
			<p>“It is,” she answered, not daring to raise her eyes.</p>
			<p>“Thank you. I was not quite sure, yet I thought I followed the direction,” said the stranger, and gracefully bowing, departed.</p>
			<p>In all her life so bright and manly a face had never crossed her path. And that voice-it seemed to answer to something down deep in her soul. It kindled a fire which was almost extinct, and that fire was hope. Perhaps she would some day see people just like him, live with them, and be young and happy.</p>
			<p>Old Trot seemed to share her newfound pleasure, and looked knowingly into her face, as much as to say, “There are some folks in the world worth looking at.”</p>
			<p>She went home that night to dream of other forms and faces than those she had been so long accustomed to, and slept more sound than she had for many months.</p>
			<p>Weeks passed away, and the bloom came back to Margaret’s cheek, a new life was in her eye, for the voice of love had spoken to her heart, and the blood leaped till the color of her face vied with that of the roses.</p>
			<p>The young man whom she met that day in the grove, often found his way to that spot, not by mistake but by inclination, attracted by the fair face of Margaret. Again and again he came, till his glowing words kindled the flame of hope to love, and it became a source of greatest pleasure to him to watch her dreamy eyes glow with brightness under his repeated vows of constancy.</p>
			<p>Clarence Bowen was the only son of a city merchant of great wealth, acquired by his own indefatigable industry. His son had inherited none of his father’s zeal for business, and after repeated efforts to make him what nature had never intended he should be, he sent him to study law at the college in D⁠—, a thriving town a few miles from Margaret’s home. It was while there, and in an hour when weary with study, he wandered away to the spot where he accidentally met her. His nature being not of the highest order, he did not hesitate to poison her mind with flattering words, until at length he won her heart, not as a pearl of great price, a treasure for himself, but as a bauble, which he might cast aside when its charm had departed.</p>
			<p>Sad indeed was the day to her in which he told her she could never be his wife. Pity her, ye who in happy homes have kind friends to guide your hearts into peace, and refresh your souls with a true and perfect love. Have charity, and raise not hand nor voice against one who, had her life been cast in as pleasant places as yours, would not have trusted so fondly in a broken reed, or listened so confidingly to the siren voice of the tempter. She had pined for a warm heart and a faithful love. She had trusted and been betrayed. You owe her your pity, not your condemnation.</p>
			<p>“Did you say you were not going to marry me, Clarence?” and asking this, she cast her eyes to the ground, and sobbed like a child.</p>
			<p>“No, girl; you ought to have known I could not. I have no money but that which my father supplies me with to pay my board and expenses. I have nothing to support⁠—”</p>
			<p>She looked so pale he dared not say more.</p>
			<p>“Go on,” she at length said, pressing her hand closer to her heart, lest its strong beating might too plainly betray her feelings.</p>
			<p>“And even could I support you, my father would disown me were I to take such a step.”</p>
			<p>“Then you never loved me, Clarence. You only sought your own pleasure and⁠—and my⁠—my ruin?”</p>
			<p>She broke down. Life had nothing now for her but shame and sorrow. Alas, the world has no pity for its children.</p>
			<p>Hard indeed must have been his heart, had it not relented then. He went and placed his hand upon her head, saying,</p>
			<p>“I would marry you, Margaret, if I had money enough,” and just that moment he meant it.</p>
			<p>She looked up through her tears to him, and seeing the expression which accompanied his words, mistook it for real sorrow at parting from her, and answered in a hopeful, bright voice⁠—</p>
			<p>“I can work ever so hard, and we might be married privately if you chose, as no one knows us, and go away. You don’t know how hard I can work, Clarence.”</p>
			<p>“And then, sometime we might become rich,” she continued, without looking at his face, “and I would study, too, and improve myself. Then we could return to your parents and be forgiven. They surely could not blame us for loving each other. You will not forsake me, will you, Clarence?”</p>
			<p>He bowed his head. She thought he wept, and she continued her words of cheer till he could bear it no longer.</p>
			<p>She laid her bursting head upon his bosom saying, “I will go away from here today, Clarence, and be no burden to you, till you can support us both.”</p>
			<p>He nerved himself for the desperate emergency, and shook her off as though she was poison, saying, in cold, measured words, not to be this time misunderstood⁠—</p>
			<p>“No, it cannot be; don’t deceive yourself; you can never be my wife,” and then he left her.</p>
			<p>Angels pity her. Heaven have mercy on her who sank prostrate with grief that bright day on the green lap of earth. One heart-piercing cry went up for help and mercy from above, and hope and love went out of that heart, perhaps forever.</p>
			<p>Faster and faster flew the betrayer, as though he would elude a pursuer from whom he could not escape. But he could not close his ears to that pleading voice, nor his eyes to that agonized look. Aye, erring mortal, that sound will pierce your soul till some reparation, some pure, unselfish deed, washes the sin away.</p>
			<p>“Why, Clarence, you look as pale as a ghost; what on earth has happened to you!” exclaimed his college chums, as he walked breathless and weary into the house.</p>
			<p>“I am sick,” he answered, and went by himself to evade further questions, which he knew would rend his soul with anguish. He early repaired to his room, but found no rest, and finding himself unable to attend to his studies the next day, obtained leave of absence.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
