<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter XI</h2>
			<p>It was not by words that they knew each other, but when their eyes met each felt that the other had passed some ordeal which made their souls akin.</p>
			<p>The stranger to whom Miss Vernon had been so drawn, met her on the beach the next morning, and asked her to walk with her.</p>
			<p>“I would like to tell you,” she said, “of my strange experience last night; perhaps these things are not new to you,” and she went on in a confiding tone at Miss Vernon’s visible look of deep interest;⁠—</p>
			<p>“I was weeping, as you may have noticed, when your strange and lovely pupil came to me⁠—weeping for the loss of one to whom I was betrothed. No mortal save myself knew the name which he gave me on the day of our engagement. It was ‘Pearl.’ My own name is Edith Weston. Judge of my emotion and surprise, when that child-a total stranger-came and spake my name in his exact tones. I have had other tests of spirit presences as clear and as positive, but none that ever thrilled me like this. Do you wonder that I already love that child with a strange, deep yearning?”</p>
			<p>“I do not. I have myself had proof through her that our dear departed linger around, and are cognizant of our sorrows as well as our joys.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you too have loved.”</p>
			<p>“Yes; but not like yourself. My mother’s love is the only love I have known.”</p>
			<p>“And you are an orphan like myself?”</p>
			<p>“I am.”</p>
			<p>“That is what drew us together. And may I know your name?”</p>
			<p>“Florence Vernon. And I was attracted to you the first time I saw you.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot tell you how glad I am to experience these proofs of human ties. It is a pleasure to me to think that wherever we go we shall meet some one who loves us. I am a dependent character, as you no doubt have perceived. I need the assurance and support of stronger minds even when I see my own way clear. Some there are who can see and go forth. I need to be led.”</p>
			<p>“I hope you are fortunate enough to have some stronger mind about you. We are not all alike, and the vine nature must have something upon which it may cling and find support, or otherwise it will trail in the dust.”</p>
			<p>“I am not thus fortunate. I have no one on whom to lean, or to whom I can look for guidance. Shall you remain long here?” she asked, fearing she had spoken too freely of herself.</p>
			<p>“We shall stay until we have received all that this atmosphere and these scenes can supply us with. It will then be our duty to go.”</p>
			<p>“I like that. I must go away very soon to join my aunt who is obliged to remain among the mountains, as the sea air does not agree with her. But look, Miss Vernon, here comes Mr. Wyman and another gentleman!” and she seemed greatly disappointed at the interruption.</p>
			<p>“Miss Weston, Mr. Deane,” said Florence, introducing them, and the next instant she watched with earnest gaze the look of admiration which he gave the timid girl. It was not a bold or intrusive look, but such an one as a man might have bestowed were he suddenly ushered into the presence of his highest conception of female worth and loveliness.</p>
			<p>Every line of his features betokened the keenest admiration, while her glance was far over the sea. Hugh saw the look, too, and was glad.</p>
			<p>Miss Vernon trembled, she knew not why. She wished that he had not come to the sea-shore, and that the beautiful stranger was all her own.</p>
			<p>The four walked together on the beach, until the heat of the day, and then Miss Weston withdrew.</p>
			<p>“The finest face I ever saw,” said Mr. Deane, watching her figure till she was out of sight, “and as lovely in soul as in form and features, I perceive.” Then turning to Miss Vernon, he said:</p>
			<p>“I see you harmonize. I am really glad it is so, for you can help each other very much.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Deane dropped the conversation, and assumed an air of abstraction, his gaze fixed on the blue waves-his thoughts none knew where.</p>
			<p>Hugh and Florence walked to the house and seated themselves in the shade, within view of the sea. Then he told her in his clear, brief way, of what had transpired between Mr. Deane and his wife, with the remark that it was far better she should be informed of the true state of affairs, and thus be guarded against the evil of false reports.</p>
			<p>“I saw your look of concern when he met Miss Weston-”</p>
			<p>She looked wonderingly in his face.</p>
			<p>“You feared for him, and her then. That was natural. I see beyond, and that no harm will come from any attachment that may arise. I hope to see them often together.”</p>
			<p>“Mr. Wyman, if I did not know you, I should sometimes fear your doctrines.”</p>
			<p>“I have no doctrines.”</p>
			<p>“Well, theories then.”</p>
			<p>“No theories either. I follow nature, and leave her to perfect all things. Sometimes you think I am not sufficiently active; that I sit an idle looker on.</p>
			<p>“What! do you know my every thought-everything that passes through my mind?” she asked, a a little agitated.</p>
			<p>“Nearly all, or rather that which goes with your states of progression.”</p>
			<p>She was vexed a little, but as the lesser ever turns to the greater, the earth to the sun for light⁠—so she, despite difference of temperament and mental expansion, was inclined to rest on his judgment.</p>
			<p>“This pure girl will give him a deeper faith in woman, unconsciously to herself, and he will become a better man; therefore fear not when you see them together, that he will lose his love for his wife. Yes, she will do him good, as you, Florence, are every day benefiting me.”</p>
			<p>“Do I? Do I make you better?” she asked in a quick, nervous way; and her soul flooded her soft, brown eyes.</p>
			<p>“You do, Florence, and make me stronger every day; while your deepening womanhood is my daily enjoyment. You give me an opportunity to know myself, and that there are many holy relations between men and women beside the conjugal.”</p>
			<p>Mrs. Foster lost no time in informing the people of L⁠—of the movements of Mr. Deane. She well knew there were persons who would circulate the report, and that it would finally reach his wife, even though she was several miles away. The report was, that Mr. Deane had brought a young lady to the sea-shore, and was seen walking with her every day and evening, and that they both were greatly enamoured with each other.</p>
			<p>Strange to say, Mrs. Deane, weary and sad, left her parents and returned to her home just before her husband’s letter reached its destination, and just in time to hear the narration of his strange conduct.</p>
			<p>Howard gone, no one knew where, save from the vague and scandalous report of a few busy tongues; no letter telling where he was, and her soul sank, and all its good resolves faded away. When she left her parents that morning, she fully resolved to meet him with all the love of her heart, for she had found that love beneath the rubbish of doubt and jealousy that had for a time concealed it. It was not strange, therefore, that all the fond trust died out when she realized that he had gone, and the bitter waters returned stronger and deeper over her hope.</p>
			<p>Shall we ever reach a world where we shall not have to plod through so much doubt and misgiving, and where our real feelings will be better understood?</p>
			<p>“He will surely come back soon,” she said again and again to herself, while the veil of uncertainty hung black before her troubled vision. Every day she listened for his footsteps, till heart-sick and weary she returned to her parents, and told them all her grief and all her fears.</p>
			<p>An hour later they handed her his letter, received an hour after her departure, and which her father had carried every day in his pocket and forgotten to re-mail to her.</p>
			<p>While every one in L⁠—was rehearsing the great wrong which, in their estimation, Mr. Deane had done his wife, she was eagerly absorbing every word of his warm-hearted letter, which he wrote on the day of his conversation with Mr. Wyman. Could she have received it before she returned again to her old home, how different would she and her parents have felt towards him. It was only for them she cared now. In vain she argued and tried to reinstate him in their good graces; but words failed, and she felt that time and circumstance alone were able to reconcile them.</p>
			<p>She longed to go to him, but he had not asked her, and only said at the close:</p>
			<p>“I shall return when I feel that we are ready to love each other as in the past. Not that I do not love you, Mabel, but I want all the richness of your affection, unclouded by distrust. We have been much to each other; we shall yet be more. When I clasp you to my heart again, all your fears will vanish. Be content to bear this separation awhile, for ’tis working good for us both.”</p>
			<p>She read it over a score of times, felt the truthfulness of his words, but could not realize how it was possible for the separation to benefit them. To her the days seemed almost without end. To him they were fraught with pleasure, saddened they might be a little with a thought of the events so lately experienced, but gladdened by the sunshine of new scenes, inspirited with new and holy emotions. It was well for her weak faith that Mrs. Deane did not see him that very evening walking with Miss Weston upon the sea-shore, engaged in close conversation. She would have questioned how it was possible that under such conditions his love for herself was growing more intense; not thinking, in her shallow philosophy, that the contrast of two lives exhibits more fully the beauties of each, and that it was by this rule she was growing in his affections.</p>
			<p>“We must wait awhile for our friends, Miss Weston; I see they are in the rear,” and he spread his shawl upon a rock, motioning her to be seated, close by the foam-white waves.</p>
			<p>Mr. Wyman and Florence soon came along. They had forgotten the presence of every one. Nothing engaged their attention but the lovely scene before them, while the moon’s light silvered the rippling surface of the waters. Their communion was not of words as they all sat together that lovely summer eve. Soul met soul, and was hushed and awed in the presence of so much that was entrancing, and when they separated each was better for the deep enjoyment they had mutually experienced.</p>
			<p>“I may seem strange,” remarked Miss Weston to her new friend, Miss Vernon, the next morning, as they sat looking at the sea, so changed in its aspect from that of the evening before, “that I should in the company of comparative strangers, feel so little reserve. I know my aunt would chide me severely, but I have not felt so happy for many years. It may be that the influence of the ocean is so hallowed and peaceful that our souls live their truer lives, but I have never before opened my heart so fully to strangers. I wonder if I have overstepped any of the lines of propriety?”</p>
			<p>“I might have thought so once, but I see and feel differently now. I think the soul knows its kin, and that it is not a matter of years but of states which causes it to unfold.”</p>
			<p>“I am glad you feel so. I seemed so strange to myself, ever conservative, now so open and free. I do not feel towards any of the others here as I do towards you and your friends. I regret that I have not a few days more to enjoy you all,” she said quite sadly, “as my aunt has written for me to come to her the last of this week.”</p>
			<p>Miss Vernon could not help thinking how much more this fair being had to impart to her aunt, for this season of rest and enjoyment. “I wonder if the time will ever come,” she often asked herself, “when we can go when and where we gravitate, and not be forced mechanically.”</p>
			<p>“I wish people could follow their natural attractions once in a while, at least,” said Miss Edith, and she fixed her fair blue eyes on the sea.</p>
			<p>Florence started; for it seemed as though she had read her thoughts.</p>
			<p>“I suppose these limitations and restrictions are for our good, else they would not be,” replied Miss Vernon.</p>
			<p>“And the desire to shake them off is natural, if not right; is it not?”</p>
			<p>“Natural, no doubt, and pleasant, if we could have the desire granted; but duty is greater than desire, and circumstances may at times impel us to the performance of the one rather than favor us with the gratification of the other. What I mean is, that it is our duty sometimes to take a part in scenes in which our hearts cannot fully sympathize.”</p>
			<p>“And yet you say you are attracted heart and mind to Mr. Wyman and his daughter. Is it not possible that, notwithstanding this, your duty calls you elsewhere⁠—that some other soul may be in need of your presence?”</p>
			<p>“You have questioned me very close, Miss Weston, but I will answer you promptly: I know of no one who needs me, else I should certainly go. Remember this⁠—in following our attractions we should never lose sight of our duties. They should go hand in hand.”</p>
			<p>“Very true. I feel that my aunt needs me, and I will go at once; this very day. I have lost a part of my restless self, and gained the repose I so much needed, since I have been here; and I am indebted to you and your friends for the exchange. Now I will go where duty calls.”</p>
			<p>“You have decided right, and I have no doubt you will be amply remunerated for the seeming sacrifice you are making of the few days of happiness you would have had in longer remaining here, had not the summons come for you to leave.”</p>
			<p>“I do not doubt it; and yet Miss Vernon, I need your atmosphere. How I wish our lives could mingle for awhile.”</p>
			<p>“If there ever comes a time when no earthly tie binds you, when duty will permit you to follow this attraction, come and live with us, and remain as long as you wish.”</p>
			<p>“With you?” exclaimed the astonished girl. “Can I? Is Mr. Wyman willing?”</p>
			<p>“He has authorized me to invite you.”</p>
			<p>“But would it be right? Will it certainly be agreeable to him?”</p>
			<p>“Most assuredly. We all love you, and as for Mr. Wyman, he never invites those to his home in whom he has no interest. So come. I know you will.”</p>
			<p>“Thank him, for me,” warmly responded Miss Weston, “and I trust the time will arrive when I can more practically demonstrate how much I thank you all for your kindness.”</p>
			<p>The morning was spent by Miss Weston in packing her trunk, and making ready for her departure, much to the surprise of Mr. Wyman, and to the disappointment of Mr. Deane, who had hoped for a longer enjoyment of hours of communion with one so rich in goodness and innocence of heart.</p>
			<p>In her atmosphere all his hardness seemed to pass away. She was balm to his troubled soul; light to his darkened vision. She would go that day, and life, busy life, close over the fresh, happy hours, and perchance never again before his vision would come that fair young face.</p>
			<p>He asked permission to ride with her to the station, and see to her baggage and tickets. It was cheerfully granted, and in a moment all was over. The train came, stopped but a second, then moved on, and was soon hid from sight by a sharp curve. Then his past life came over this little break, this brief respite, and he felt that he, too, was ready to go and kindle anew the waning flame upon his domestic hearth.</p>
			<p>Dawn, to the surprise of her father, was greatly delighted when she found Miss Weston was going.</p>
			<p>“She is wanted there; some one in the air told me,” she said, and clapped her hands in glee.</p>
			<p>Her departure made quite a break in the little party, and when Mr. Deane made ready to go the next day, Florence and Mr. Wyman both felt that their own stay was about over.</p>
			<p>Judge of their surprise two days after, to receive a note from Miss Weston, saying that her aunt had been seized with paralysis of the brain the day she arrived, and would not recover.</p>
			<p>Every test of this nature strengthened Mr. Wyman in the belief in his daughter’s vision, and he felt that there could be no safer light placed in his path for him to follow; a light which no more interferes with man’s individuality or reasoning powers than the falling of the rays of the sun upon the earth.</p>
			<p>The cry of the multitude is, that mediumship and impressibility detract from individual life, lessens the whole tone of manhood, and transforms the subject to a mere machine. Such conclusions are far from correct. Our whole being is enriched, and made stronger and fuller by true impressibility. Are we in any degree depleted if we for a time become messengers to bear from friend to friend, words of love, cheer and encouragement? Are we mere machines, because we obey the promptings of the unseen and go where sorrow sits with bowed head, or want and misery wait for relief? If so, we are in good service, and have the consciousness of knowing, that, being thus the instruments of God’s will, we cannot be otherwise than dear to him.</p>
			<p>All matter is mediumistic. Life is tributary, one phase to another, and soul to soul speaks suggestively.</p>
			<p>The ocean has its fullness from tributary streams which flow to its bed.</p>
			<p>Lives alone are great that are willing to be fed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
