<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 34</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span></h2>
			<p>The years passed by and left Dawn steadily and peacefully doing her work, giving men and women each day extended views of life and deeper consciousness of their own powers. By the aid of friends and her father, she had succeeded in establishing a home for orphans, of both sexes, in a wild and beautiful locality, where all the varied faculties of their minds could expand. All were required to work a certain number of hours each day; then study and recreation followed. She became daily firmer in her belief that bringing the sexes together was the only way to make them pure and refined. Their labors in the garden and field were together; as also were their studies and lessons. There was a large hall, decorated with wreaths and flowers, where they met every evening and sang, danced, and conversed, as they were disposed; while each day added to their number. The boys were trained in mechanical as well as in agricultural pursuits, and it was pleasing to witness their daily growing delicacy of deportment towards the other sex, as well as the tone of love and sympathy which was growing stronger between them.</p>
			<p>Dawn did not succeed in her effort at once; the majority laughed at and ridiculed her plan, but faithful to her inspiration, she continued on, and a few years witnessed the erection of a large, substantial building among the tall pines and spreading oaks. Parents who had passed “over the river,” came and blest her labors for their children; and they who, though living on earth, had left their offspring uncared for, wept when they heard of the happy home among the verdant hills, where their children were being taught the only religion of life-the true art of living.</p>
			<p>The leading idea and aim was to educate these children into a harmonious life, and to preserve a proper balance of the physical and mental by an equal exercise of both. The result of her efforts was most gratifying and encouraging to Dawn. Her success was apparent to all, even to those who at first sneered at her course. The mutual respect which was manifest among them; the quick, discerning minds, and the physical activity; the well-cultured fields, the beautiful lawns, the gardens brilliant and fragrant with flowers, the neatly arranged rooms, the books, the pictures and the various means of study, amusement and exercise: and around all, the gentle and loving spirit of Dawn, hovering like a halo of heavenly protection, combined to form a scene which no one could fail to admire. It taught one lesson to all, and that was: make children useful and you will make them happy.</p>
			<p>Basil and his sister came often to the home, where Dawn seemed to preside like a guardian angel. It had been the wish of their lives to see such a home for orphans, a wish they never expected to see fulfilled. They gave largely to its support, and were never happier than when within its walls. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dalton, whom the world pitied so generously, here found her sphere, as did many others who had felt long unbalanced. She taught the children music, drawing, and the languages, and extended her life and interest throughout the dwelling, to every heart therein. Thus the maternal was satisfied each day, and each hour she felt less need of a union which the wise world predicted she would enter into by the time her divorce was granted. Beatrice came and took Dawn’s place whenever she wished to go to her home to refresh herself in the abiding love of her father and mother.</p>
			<p>“I never thought sich a beautiful thing could be on airth,” said Aunt Polly Day, one of the eldest of the town’s people, to Dawn, the first time that she met her after the “home” was established. “Seems as though the angels had a hand in’t, child, and only ter think, you’re at the head o’nt. Why, I remember the night, or it was e’en-a-most day though, that you was born. Beats all natur how time does fly. It may be I shan’t get out ter see yer home fer them e’er little orphans, in this world, but may be I shall when I goes up above. Do you s’pose the Lord gives us sight of folks on airth, when we’re there, Miss Wyman?”</p>
			<p>“I know he does. I feel that I have been helped by the angels to do this great work.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it’s a comfortin’ faith, to say the least on ‘t; and I don’t care how much you and your pa has been slandered. I believe yer good folks, and desarving of the kingdom.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose no one ever feels worthy of the kingdom, Aunty; but we all know that if we seek the good and the true, that we shall find rest here and hereafter.”</p>
			<p>“Them’s my sentiment, and I don’t see how folks make you out so ungodly, if livin’ true, and bein’ kind to the poor is unrighteousness, then give me the sinners to dwell among. Think of all the things yer pa has given me, all my life, and there’s old Deacon Sims won’t take one cent off of his wood he sells me, when the Lord has told him in the good book to be kind to the widow and fatherless. He makes long prayers ‘nough, though. Well, I s’pose he has ter kinder reach out to heaven that way, and make up in words what he lacks in deeds.”</p>
			<p>“He will make it all up, Aunty, when he has passed into the other life, and becomes conscious how little he has done here.”</p>
			<p>“May be; but it’s like puttin’ all the week’s work inter Sat’day night. I reckon he’ll have to work smart to make up.”</p>
			<p>Dawn could but smile at the quaint, but shrewd remark, and slipping a generous gift of money into the hand of the old lady, departed to spend her last evening with her father, and Herbert, who was now with them every evening, before going to her home among the hills.</p>
			<p>How still and white his face looks, thought Dawn, as Herbert, at their request, seated himself at the instrument to play. One long, rapt, upturned gaze, and then the fingers stole over the keys.</p>
			<p>Was it the music of the air, or some being of the upper realms breathing on him, infusing his soul with sound, that caused him to produce such searching tones, and send them quivering through the souls of the listeners? Now, moaning like the winds and waves; now, glad as though two beings long separated, had met. Then the song grew sweeter, softer, mellower, till every eye was flowing; on and on, more lovely and imploring till one could only think that</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>					<span>“The angels of Wind and of Fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chant only one hymn, and expire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the song’s irresistible stress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expire in their rapture and wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As harp-strings are broken asunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By music they throb to express.”</span>
</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The strains died away. Herbert sank back and spoke not; but on the white, uplifted face they read that an angel had been with him, one of the upper air. No words broke the stillness of that atmosphere; not a breath stirred its heavenly spell.</p>
			<p>Without speech they separated, and the hallowed sweetness of that hour remained with them in their dreams, which came not to either until long after midnight.</p>
			<p>From her own experience, Dawn saw that Herbert must mingle more with people, and become interested in life. She knew that it would not be well for him to think too much of the one whom the world pronounced gone, but who had come nearer than any earthly relation known.</p>
			<p>“Come to my mountain home, and see my family,” she said to him the next morning, at parting.</p>
			<p>He partly promised by words, but his air of abstraction indicated that he had no intention of so doing.</p>
			<p>What was that look which flashed over her features just then? Surely, the expression of his own dear Florence, pleading for something.</p>
			<p>“I will come, Dawn, and very soon,” he said, this time decisively.</p>
			<p>Dawn’s face lit up with another joy beside her own, as she pressed his hand and bade him good bye.</p>
			<p>Not many weeks elapsed before Herbert fulfilled his promise to visit the Home. A murmuring sound of voices fell upon his ears as he approached the dwelling, and as he came nearer, the beautiful air of “Home” touched his heart with a new sweetness. The children were singing their evening hymn. Just as he stepped upon the portico the song ceased, and Dawn came gliding from the hall.</p>
			<p>“Herbert! Welcome!” she exclaimed, with such an expression upon her face that no words were needed to tell him how glad she felt at his coming.</p>
			<p>In her own little sitting room she had his supper brought, which he seemed to enjoy greatly, and then they walked in the garden till the dew hung heavy on the grass.</p>
			<p>The days went by, and still he lingered. It was life to him to see so many children happy through labor and usefulness. Soon a desire to benefit them in some way took possession of his mind, and it was not long before he had so won their love by songs and stories of travel and history, that the evening group was not considered perfect without <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Temple, or “Uncle Herbert,” as a few of the youngest ventured to call him.</p>
			<p>How childhood, youth, and age need each other’s companionship. How perfect is the household group which includes them all, from the infant to the white-haired sire. Homes without children! Heaven help those who have not the sunshine of innocent childhood to keep them fresh-hearted.</p>
			<p>Through this sphere of life and love, he found his life revived. Gradually the sorrow-clouds passed away, fringed by the sunshine of hope which was rising in his breast.</p>
			<p>Dawn was his strength and counsellor every day. Through her he learned how closely we are related to the other life, and yet how firmly we must hold our relation to this, that we may become instruments for good, and not mere sensitives, feeling keenly human wants, but doing nothing to supply them.</p>
			<p>“I intend to devote myself to life, and help the human family in some way,” he said to Dawn one evening, as the twilight was robing itself in purple clouds. “I have caught my inspiration from you, and will no longer moan my days away. My treasures lie beyond, and I will strive to make myself worthy of the union when I am permitted to go over the silent stream.</p>
			<p>“Do,” answered Dawn, “and thus make her life richer and happier.”</p>
			<p>“I make her happier? Has she not gone to rest?”</p>
			<p>“A kind of rest, I know; but does she not still live and mingle her life with yours each day? Therefore, whatever the quality of your thought and action is, she must partake of it, and for the time absorb it into her spirit. If your life is vague and full of unrest, her life will become so. On the contrary, if yours is strong and full of purpose, you give her strength and rest of soul.”</p>
			<p>“Is it so? Are we so united after death?”</p>
			<p>“What part of Florence died, Herbert? The spirit passed out, carrying every faculty, every sense and emotion, to that land where many dream that we lose all consciousness of life, below, and remain in some blest state of dreamy ease. Not so. Our lives at death, so called, are made more sensitive to all we owe our friends on earth, and death is but the clasp that binds us closer.”</p>
			<p>“Your words stimulate me to labor and make my dear ones happy through my life. O, that like you, I could know that they at times are with me; or, rather, that they could come and give me that evidence I so much need, of their presence and their power to commune with us.”</p>
			<p>“I could not bring to you that evidence, because I know them and you, but I have a lovely girl who has just come to our Home, a stranger to you and to myself, who has this gift of second-sight, and if you wish, I will present her to you.”</p>
			<p>“Do so, for nothing would give me more happiness.”</p>
			<p>A young girl, with light hair, and blue eyes which ever seemed looking far away, was led into the sitting room by Dawn, and stood silent and speechless as soon as she had entered. Her outer senses seemed closed, as she spoke in a voice full of feeling these words:</p>
			<p>“Be comforted, I am here; thy wife, Florence, and thy little ones. The grave has nought of us you hold so dear. Believe, and we will come. I whispered a song to your soul one night, and your fingers gave it words. Farewell, I will come again; nay, I go not away from one I love so well. ‘T is Florence speaks to Herbert, her husband, from over the river called Death.”</p>
			<p>The child looked wonderingly around, then wistfully to Dawn, who motioned her to the door, that she might join her companions.</p>
			<p>“Is she always thus successful?” asked Herbert, after a long silence.</p>
			<p>“No. I have often known her to fail; but when the impression comes, it’s invariably correct.”</p>
			<p>“Wonderful child. How can you educate her, and yet have her retain this strange gift?”</p>
			<p>“I obey my impressions, and allow her to play a great deal. She cannot follow her class, therefore I teach her alone, short, easy lessons, and never tax her in any way, physically or mentally.”</p>
			<p>“You must love her very much; I long to see more of her wonderful power.”</p>
			<p>“You shall; but the hour is late, I must now send my children to bed and happy dreams.”</p>
			<p>There was soon a cessasion of the voices, and cheerful “good nights” echoed through the dwelling. When all was still, Dawn came and sat by him, and long they talked of the land of the hereafter, and its intimate connection with this life, so fraught with pain and pleasure.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
